CHAPTER XXX.
Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was long enough to convince
him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband
and such a neighbour as we're not often met with.
While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his morning to driving him out in
his gig and showing him the country.
But when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth
was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration, for
the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work
in the garden, or in reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own bookroom
which fronted the road.
The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth, at first, rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining parlor
for common use.
It was a better-sized room and had a more pleasant aspect, but she soon saw that her
friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have
been much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively, and she gave Charlotte
credit for the arrangement.
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to
Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along and how often, especially, Miss
Debord drove by in her Phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it
happened almost every day.
She not unfrequently stopped at the parsonage, and had a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte,
but was scarcely ever prevailed upon to get out.
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and not many in which
his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise, till Elizabeth recollected that
there might be other family livings to be disposed of.
She could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours.
Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped her
observation that was passing in the room during these visits.
She examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently,
found fault with the arrangement of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence, and
if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that
Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family.
Elizabeth soon perceived that, though this great lady was not in commission of the piece
of the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of
which were carried to her by Mr. Collins, and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed
to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the village to settle
their differences, silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty.
The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week, and, allowing
for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card-table in the evening, every
such entertainment was the counterpart of the first.
Their other engagements were few, as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was
beyond Mr. Collins's reach.
This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably
enough.
There were half-hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather was so fine
for the time of year that she had often great enjoyment out of doors.
Her favourite walk, and where she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady
Catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond
the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away, Easter was approaching,
and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which,
in so small a circle, must be important.
Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course
of a few weeks, and though there were not many of her acquaintances whom she did not
prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him were by his
behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his
coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration,
and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas
and herself.
His arrival was soon known at the parsonage, for Mr. Collins was walking the whole morning
within view of the lodges opening into Huntsford Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance
of it, and after making his bow as the carriage turned into the park, hurried home with the
great intelligence.
On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews
of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam,
the younger son of his lord, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins
returned, the gentleman accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her husband's room crossing
the road, and immediately, running into the other, told the girls what an honour they
might expect, adding,
I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would never have come
so soon to wait upon me.
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach
was announced by the doorbell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the
room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person
and addressed most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been used to look
in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments with the usual reserve to Mrs. Collins, and, whatever
might be his feelings towards her friend, met her with every appearance of composure.
Elizabeth merely curtsied to him without saying a word.
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into a conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a
well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly, but his cousin, after having addressed a slight
observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking
to anybody.
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after
the health of her family. She answered him in the usual way, and after a moment's pause,
added,
My oldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never happened to see her
there?
She was perfectly sensible that he never had, but she wished to see whether he would betray
any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he
looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet
Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentleman soon afterwards went away.